---
title: Installing the i3 Windows Manager

weight: 3
layout: learningpathall
---

## Install the required packages

* i3 needs a few packages installed to operate. If prompted for a selection on these or any following pacman installs just press enter to select the default
```cmd
pacman -Sy xorg xorg-xinit dmenu
``` 

* It also needs a ttf font installed to display correctly. I chose ttf-liberation and it worked for me, but this is user preference
```cmd
sudo pacman -Sy ttf-liberation
```

* Install a terminal emulator. I went with Alacritty for its speed, but this is a user choice
```cmd
sudo pacman -Sy alacritty
```

## Install i3 and initial configuration

* Install
```cmd
sudo pacman -Sy i3
```

* Edit xinitrc to allow a command to start i3 and the Xorg display server
```cmd
echo "exec i3" >> ~/.xinitrc
```

* Start i3
```cmd
startx
```

* Upon starting for the first time it will prompt you if you want to generate a config file. Just press enter to generate

* It will then ask you what you want your modifier key to be. This is the key you will hold to be able to control the i3 manager. Entirely user preference, I went with the Win key as some applications make use of Alt

## First use

* Your screen will be blank. Press \<modifier> + Enter to bring up a terminal emulator. Doing so twice will split the screen. 

* \<modifier> + d will bring a text selector at the top of the screen where you can start typing to select any installed software to open.

* Read the user's guide to learn how much i3 can do: https://i3wm.org/docs/userguide.html

## Further i3 configuration

i3 should be running correctly at this point, but there are some additional adjustments that might be desired that are specific to the Pinebook Pro. Mainly fixing the battery status on the bottom right and adjusting the default touchpad behaviour. 

### Fixing the battery status 

* Edit the i3 i3status.conf file with root permissions. It is found in /etc/i3status.conf. Vi is the only editor installed at this point 
```cmd
sudo vi /etc/i3status.conf
```

* It will say "battery all" in two places in the file. Change those to both be "battery 0" instead. In the now named "battery 0" property change it to the following
```
battery 0 {
    status_chr = " CHR"
    status_bat = " BAT"
    format = "%status %percentage %remaining"
    threshold_type = "percentage"
    path = "/sys/class/power_supply/cw2015-battery/uevent"
    low_threshold = 20
}
```

### Changing the touchpad behaviour

* View the hardware devices on your system
```cmd
xinput
```

* View the properties of the touchpad. For the Pinebook Pro the touchpad should be HAILUCK CO.,LTD USB KEYBOARD Touchpad. Note that capitalization is important  
```cmd
xinput list-props "HAILUCK CO.,LTD USB KEYBOARD Touchpad"
```

* The values to the very right are a binary selector, and so you can change whichever ones you want. You don't need to type the number in parentheses when changing. For example, to turn on natural scrolling
```cmd
xinput set-prop "HAILUCK CO.,LTD USB KEYBOARD Touchpad" "libinput Natural Scrolling Enabled" 1
```

* To make the changes permanent, add the line in ~/.config/i3/config. I don't think it matters where you put it, I just put it at the very bottom of the file
```cmd
execute xinput set-prop "HAILUCK CO.,LTD USB KEYBOARD Touchpad" "libinput Natural Scrolling Enabled" 1
```

* For an explanation of all properties view: https://wayland.freedesktop.org/libinput/doc/latest/configuration.html 
