---
title: Use an optimized math library
weight: 4

### FIXED, DO NOT MODIFY
layout: learningpathall
---

The `libamath` library from Arm is an optimized subset of the standard library math functions for Arm-based CPUs, providing both scalar and vector functions at different levels of precision. It includes vectorized versions (NEON and SVE) of common math functions found in the standard library, such as those in the `<cmath>` header. 

The trivial snippet below uses the `<cmath>` standard cmath header to calculate the base exponential of a scalar value. 

Use a text editor to copy and paste the example code below into a file named `basic_math.cpp`.

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <ctime>
#include <cmath>  // Include the standard library

int main() {
    std::srand(std::time(0));
    double random_number = std::rand() / static_cast<double>(RAND_MAX);
    double result = exp(random_number); // Use the standard exponential function
    std::cout << "Exponential of " << random_number << " is " << result << std::endl;
    return 0;
}
```

Compile the code using the `g++` command. You can use the `ldd` command to print the shared objects for dynamic linking: 


```bash
g++ basic_math.cpp -o basic_math
ldd basic_math
```

Observe the superset `libm.so` is linked. The output is:

```output
        linux-vdso.so.1 (0x0000f55218587000)
        libstdc++.so.6 => /lib/aarch64-linux-gnu/libstdc++.so.6 (0x0000f55218200000)
        libm.so.6 => /lib/aarch64-linux-gnu/libm.so.6 (0x0000f55218490000)
        libc.so.6 => /lib/aarch64-linux-gnu/libc.so.6 (0x0000f55218050000)
        /lib/ld-linux-aarch64.so.1 (0x0000f5521854e000)
        libgcc_s.so.1 => /lib/aarch64-linux-gnu/libgcc_s.so.1 (0x0000f55218460000)
```

## Update to use an optimized library

Using the optimized math library `libamath` requires minimal source code changes for the scalar example. Modify the include statements to point to the correct header file and additional compiler flags. 

Libamath routines have maximum errors inferior to 4 ULPs, where ULP stands for Unit in the Last Place, which is the smallest difference between two consecutive floating-point numbers at a specific precision. These routines only support the default rounding mode (round-to-nearest, ties to even). Therefore, switching from `libm` to `libamath` results in a small accuracy loss on a range of routines, similar to other vectorized implementations of these functions.

Use a text editor to copy and paste the following C++ code into a file named `optimized_math.cpp`.

```cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <ctime>
#include <amath.h> // Include the Arm Performance Library header

int main() {
    std::srand(std::time(0));
    double random_number = std::rand() / static_cast<double>(RAND_MAX);
    double result = exp(random_number); // Use the optimized exp function from libamath
    std::cout << "Exponential of " << random_number << " is " << result << std::endl;
    return 0;
}
```

Compile the code using the following `g++` command. Again, use the `ldd` command to print the shared objects for dynamic linking.  

```bash
g++ optimized_math.cpp -o optimized_math -lamath -lm
ldd optimized_math
```

Now you observe the `libamath.so` shared object is linked:

```output
        linux-vdso.so.1 (0x0000eb1eb379b000)
        libamath.so => /opt/arm/armpl_24.10_gcc/lib/libamath.so (0x0000eb1eb35c0000)
        libstdc++.so.6 => /lib/aarch64-linux-gnu/libstdc++.so.6 (0x0000eb1eb3200000)
        libc.so.6 => /lib/aarch64-linux-gnu/libc.so.6 (0x0000eb1eb3050000)
        libm.so.6 => /lib/aarch64-linux-gnu/libm.so.6 (0x0000eb1eb3520000)
        /lib/ld-linux-aarch64.so.1 (0x0000eb1eb3762000)
        libgcc_s.so.1 => /lib/aarch64-linux-gnu/libgcc_s.so.1 (0x0000eb1eb34f0000
```

### What about vector operations?

In the Arm Performance Library, scalar operations follow the same naming convention of `libm`. This means you can simply update the header file and recompile your code with minimal changes.

For vector operations, you have two options:

* One option is to rely on the compiler autovectorization, where the compiler automatically generates the vectorized code. The Arm Compiler for Linux (ACfL) uses autovectorization.

* The second option is can use vector routines, which uses name mangling. Mangling is a technique used in computer programming to modify the names of vector functions to ensure uniqueness and avoid conflicts. This is particularly important in compiled languages like C++ and in environments where multiple libraries or modules may be used together.

In the context of Arm's AArch64 architecture, vector name mangling follows the specific convention below to differentiate between scalar and vector versions of functions. 

```output
'_ZGV' <isa> <mask> <vlen> <signature> '_' <original_name>
```

Where the values are given below:
- **original_name** : name of scalar libm function
- **ISA** : 'n' for Neon, 's' for SVE
- **Mask** : 'M' for masked/predicated version, 'N' for unmasked. Only masked routines are defined for SVE, and only unmasked for Neon.
- **vlen** : integer number representing vector length expressed as number of lanes. For Neon <vlen>='2' in double-precision and <vlen>='4' in single-precision. For SVE, <vlen>='x'.
- **signature** : 'v' for 1 input floating point or integer argument, 'vv' for 2. More details in AArch64's vector function ABI.

