---
title: Setup Your Environment
weight: 3

### FIXED, DO NOT MODIFY
layout: learningpathall
---

If you are new to cloud computing, please refer to our learning path on [Getting started with Servers and Cloud Computing](https://learn.arm.com/learning-paths/servers-and-cloud-computing/intro/).

## Connect to an AWS Arm-based Instance

In this example we will be building and running our C++ application on an AWS Graviton 2 instance running Ubuntu 24.04 LTS. Once connected run the following commands to confirm the operating system and archiecture version. 

```bash
cat /etc/*lsb*
```

You will see an output such as the following:

```output
DISTRIB_ID=Ubuntu
DISTRIB_RELEASE=24.04
DISTRIB_CODENAME=noble
DISTRIB_DESCRIPTION="Ubuntu 24.04.1 LTS"
```

Next, we will confirm we are using a 64-bit Arm-based system using the following command

```bash
uname -m
```

You will see the following output.

```output
aarch64
```

## Enable Environment modules

Environment modules are a tool to quickly modify your shell configuration and environment variables. For this learning path, it allows us to quickly switch between different compiler versions. 

Install Environment Modules

   First, you need to install the environment modules package. Open your terminal and run the following command:
   ```bash
   sudo apt update
   sudo apt install environment-modules
   ```

Load environment modules after the package is installed. 

```bash
sudo chmod 755 /usr/share/modules/init/bash
source /usr/share/modules/init/bash
```
Reload your shell configuration. 

```bash
source ~/.bashrc
```

Install various compiler version on your Ubuntu system. For this example we will install version 9 of the gcc/g++ compiler to demonstrate potential improvements your application could achieve. 

```bash
sudo add-apt-repository ppa:ubuntu-toolchain-r/test
sudo apt update
sudo apt install gcc-9 g++-9
```

Create a module file for each compiler installed. 

```bash
mkdir -p ~/modules/gcc
nano ~/modules/gcc/9
```
Copy and paste the text below into the nano text editor and save the file
```ouput
#%Module1.0
prepend-path PATH /usr/bin/gcc-10
prepend-path PATH /usr/bin/g++-10
```

