---
title: Introduction to the PMU
weight: 2

### FIXED, DO NOT MODIFY
layout: learningpathall
---

The Neoverse core PMU measures hardware events generated by that specific CPU. PMU events are used to measure performance, monitor workload efficiency, and track resource utilization and requirements. The [Arm Neoverse N2 PMU guide](https://developer.arm.com/documentation/PJDOC-466751330-590448/2-0/?lang=en) describes the architectural background and PMU event definitions used in this learning path. Other Neoverse core PMU guides are available on https://developer.arm.com/. This learning path demonstrates how to trigger common cache PMU events and why certain events are triggered upon cache accesses. This learning path is not intended to teach how to run event simulations or counters. This learning path includes CPU architecture and Arm assembly language that is found in more detail on [Learn the Architecture - A-profile – Arm®](https://www.arm.com/architecture/learn-the-architecture/a-profile). The following sections may be helpful - AArch64 Instruction Set Architecture (ISA); AArch64 Memory Management; AArch64 Memory Attributes and Properties; and Memory Systems, Ordering, and Barriers.

## PMU Events 
This learning path uses the Neoverse N2 core to count PMU events. The following code and analysis of events can be applied to other Neoverse cores. However, check your Neoverse core's Technical Reference Manual to ensure your core supports the event. 

The Neoverse N2 has six counters that can be programmed to count any PMU event supported by the CPU. This learning path solely describes common microarchitectural events, some of which may be cache or TLB accesses and executed instructions.

The review questions at the end of this learning path are solely based on Neoverse core architecture and PMU events.

The event groups covered in this learning path are:
- Cache Events
    - Level 1 Data Cache
    - Level 1 Instruction Cache
    - Level 2 Unified Cache
    - Last Level Cache




