---
title: Memory Tagging Changes
weight: 4

### FIXED, DO NOT MODIFY
layout: learningpathall
---

In this section you will learn how the allocator was modified relative to the one used
in the [Write a Dynamic Memory Allocator](learning-paths/cross-platform/dynamic-memory-allocator/) learning path.

All the code snippets shown here are from the sources shown in the previous section.

## Memory Initialisation

Memory with tag storage is not allocated by the kernel by default. So the application
(the heap in this case) must ask for it specifically.

This heap does that in `simple_heap_init`.

```C
int got = prctl(
  PR_SET_TAGGED_ADDR_CTRL,
  PR_TAGGED_ADDR_ENABLE |
    PR_MTE_TCF_SYNC |
  (0xfffe << PR_MTE_TAG_SHIFT), 0, 0, 0);
```

However we need to setup how memory tagging will act first. `PR_SET_TAGGED_ADDR_CTRL`
enables the ["Tagged Address ABI"](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/next/arm64/tagged-address-abi.html) which means that the kernel will allow us to
use tagged addresses when interacting with it.

`PR_TAGGED_ADDR_ENABLE` enables the ABI and the memory tagging extension.
`PR_MTE_TCF_SYNC` enables synchronous exceptions from tag mismatches. This means
that the exception is reported as it happens, rather than waiting for a future
point to report them (for example, the next syscall).

`0xfffe << PR_MTE_TAG_SHIFT` is a 16 bit bitmask that tells the kernel which
memory tag values are allowed to be generated by MTE's random tag generation
instructions like `irg`. The value used here means "generate any value apart from 0".
The reason for this will be explained later.

{{% notice Note %}}  You will not need to understand assembly for this learning path,
specific instructions are only mentioned for context.{{% /notice %}}

Now the kernel is ready for us to ask for tagged memory. We do this using the standard
`mmap` syscall but with an extra option `PROT_MTE`.

```C
  storage = mmap(0, STORAGE_SIZE,
                 PROT_READ | PROT_WRITE |
                     // Memory should have memory tagging enabled.
                     PROT_MTE,
                 MAP_PRIVATE | MAP_ANONYMOUS, -1, 0);
```

Using `PROT_MTE` means that the memory allocated by the kernel will have
allocation tags associated with it.

The kernel promises us that this memory's allocation tags will always be all `0`
when first allocated, so we will trust that and also use `0` for marking free
memory in the allocator. This is why previously we excluded the value `0` from
random tag generation.

## Memory Allocation

To allocate memory we must walk the heap's memory ranges until:
* We find a free range of suitable size or
* We get to the end of the heap, meaning we cannot allocate any more space.

Memory tagging changes the details of this process in a few ways.

### Padding Allocation Sizes

MTE protects memory in "granules" of 16 bytes. This means that allocations
smaller than 16 bytes need to be rounded up to that size (other strategies are
possible but not implemented in this allocator).

Recall that a range header comes before the usable part of the allocation and
that header is 8 bytes in size (see the `Header` type). So if we called
`simple_malloc(4)`, the memory allocated would look like this:

```text
| Header  | Allocation | Padding |
| 8 bytes | 4 bytes    | 4 bytes |
```

For a total of 16 bytes. The same logic applies no matter the size of the
allocation. The total size must always be rounded up to a multiple of 16 bytes.

Those 16 byte chunks must also be aligned to 16 bytes. This is ensured first by us
knowing that the memory returned by `mmap` will already be aligned and by never
using the memory in anything less than 16 byte chunks.

Padding in this way allows the allocation tags to look like this:
```text
| 4 byte allocation | Free memory...         |
| non-zero tag      | tag 0, tag 0 (repeats) |
```

An allocation will never straddle 2 granules. This allows us to assign
different tags to each allocation (and assign tag `0` to free space).

### Accessing Range Headers

The ranges we walk have headers that are stored in tagged
memory. This means we cannot simply increment a pointer that pointed to one
range and expect to be able to read from a subsequent range.

For example, if we have done one allocation the ranges might be:
```text
  [0x0100400000802000 -> 0x0100400000802010) : [memory tag: 0x1] [allocated, size = 16 bytes]
  [0x0000400000802010 -> 0x0000400000803000) : [memory tag: 0x0] [     free, size = 4080 bytes]
```

The pointer to the first range will have a logical tag of `1`. Then we skip
forward by the size of that range to the second range. However, the logical tag
is still the same as it was before, but it must be `0` for us to access the
second header without causing an exception.

This is why the function `read_header` calls `get_memory_tag` to get the real
allocation tag of the header we're about to read from. That function calls a
function from the Arm C Language Extensions (ACLE) called `__arm_mte_get_tag`.

`__arm_mte_get_tag` takes a pointer to an address. This pointer can have any
logical tag. From the location pointed to, it reads the allocaton tag, storing
it back into the pointer value you gave to it. Overwriting the existing logical tag.

This corrects the pointer so that it always has the correct logical tag
for the header we are about to access.

### Generating Tag Values

Once we have found a free range to allocate the space in, we need to know what its
allocation tag should be. It cannot be `0` because we've reserved that for free
space. It must be one of the other 15 values.

Recall that we passed `(0xfffe << PR_MTE_TAG_SHIFT)` to `prctl` earlier. This
mask means "generate any tag value apart from 0".

In a production scenario, this random generation is prefereable as it prevents
attacks where someone with knowledge of the program execution predicts
what the tags will be.

However, this does mean that the output of the program is different every time and due to the
probabalistic nature of MTE some issues may not always be caught because of this.

For demo purposes we have added a `randomise_memory_tags` option in `heap.c`.
If you set this to `false`, tag values are generated from a loop of values 1-15.
If it is `true` then random tags are generated in the range 1-15.

With `randomise_memory_tags` set to `true`, subsequent allocations will
always have different tags.

```text
  [0x0100400000802000 -> 0x0100400000802010) : [memory tag: 0x1] [allocated, size = 16 bytes]
  [0x0200400000802010 -> 0x0200400000802020) : [memory tag: 0x2] [allocated, size = 16 bytes]
```

This is good for testing. However an attacker who knows this could predict that
the next allocation would have tag 3 and forge pointers to it.

Randomising the tags mitigates that but means that subsequent (and possibly
neighbouring) allocations may have the same tag. Reducing the protection MTE
can give.

The memory allocator can mitigate this too, by excluding neighbouring tags
when generating the new tag. The allocator shown here does not do that, but
the idea is discussed more at the end of this path.

## Setting Allocaton Tags

Once we've chosen a range to use and what tag it should have, we have to set
the allocation tag of all granules (16 byte chunks) in the range.

This is done by `tag_range`. This function assumes that `range` points
to the start of the range and contains a logical tag equal to the allocation
tag we want to set. `size` is the size of the range.

We assume that `range` is 16 byte aligned and that `size` is a multiple of 16.
Which should be true given the steps we took earlier.

The actual tag setting is done by another ACLE function `__arm_mte_set_tag`.
This sets the allocation tag of a location to the logical tag of the pointer
to that location. We do this in a loop until the entire range has the new tag value.

## Using Allocated Memory

One of the great features of MTE is that it uses part of the top byte of the
pointer. This builds on a feature called "Top Byte Ignore", which is enabled
by many operating systems including Linux.

Top Byte Ignore means that the CPU does not care what is stored in the top
byte of a pointer. User software and kernel interfaces may need adjustments,
but for simple use cases a tagged pointer can be used anywhere that one without
a tag could be.

For our allocator, it means that all it has to do is return the pointer
to the application with a logical tag set. The application does not have to
be aware that memory tagging is being used.

In this demo, the application does have a memory tagging aware signal handler,
which is explained later.

## Freeing Memory

The overall steps are the same as without memory tagging. Find the header
of the range the pointer refers to and mark that as free memory.

To do so we write the range header using a pointer with the same logical tag
as the one given to `simple_free` by the program. This operation could fault
if the program is trying to free memory multiple times, or using the wrong
pointer. This situation will be explained later.

Once that is done the range is given an allocation tag of 0, which we are using
for free memory. This is sometimes called "untagging" since the default allocation
tag is also 0.

This "untagging" means that if the application tries to use a pointer to this
allocation after it has been freed, the access will cause an exception
(in the majority of cases, it is possible that it has been reallocated with
the same tag).
